1. I confess that we all have an inborn affection for our body; I confess that
we are entrusted with its guardianship. I do not maintain that the body is not
to be indulged at all; but I maintain that we must not be slaves to it. He
will have many masters who makes his body his master, who is over-fearful in
its behalf, who judges everything according to the body. 2. We should conduct
ourselves not as if we ought to live for the body, but as if we could not live
without it. Our too great love for it makes us restless with fears, burdens us
with cares, and exposes us to insults. Virtue is held too cheap by the man who
counts his body too dear. We should cherish the body with the greatest care;
but we should also be prepared, when reason, self-respect, and duty demand the
sacrifice, to deliver it even to the flames.
3. Let us, however, in so far as we can, avoid discomforts as well as dangers,
and withdraw to safe ground, by thinking continually how we may repel all
objects of fear. If I am not mistaken, there are three main classes of these:
we fear want, we fear sickness, and we fear the troubles which result from the
violence of the stronger. 4. And of all these, that which shakes us most is
the dread which hangs over us from our neighbour's ascendancy; for it is
accompanied by great outcry and uproar. But the natural evils which I have
mentioned, – want and sickness, – steal upon us silently with no shock of
terror to the eye or to the ear. The other kind of evil comes, so to speak, in
the form of a huge parade. Surrounding it is a retinue of swords and fire and
chains and a mob of beasts to be let loose upon the disembowelled entrails of
men. 5. Picture to yourself under this head the prison, the cross, the rack,
the hook, and the stake which they drive straight through a man until it
protrudes from his throat. Think of human limbs torn apart by chariots driven
in opposite directions, of the terrible shirt smeared and interwoven with
inflammable materials, and of all the other contrivances devised by cruelty,
in addition to those which I have mentioned![1] 6. It is not surprising, then,
if our greatest terror is of such a fate; for it comes in many shapes and its
paraphernalia are terrifying. For just as the torturer accomplishes more in
proportion to the number of instruments which he displays, – indeed, the
spectacle overcomes those who would have patiently withstood the suffering, –
similarly, of all the agencies which coerce and master our minds, the most
effective are those which can make a display. Those other troubles are of
course not less serious; I mean hunger, thirst, ulcers of the stomach, and
fever that parches our very bowels. They are, however, secret; they have no
bluster and no heralding; but these, like huge arrays of war, prevail by
virtue of their display and their equipment.
7. Let us, therefore, see to it that we abstain from giving offence. It is
sometimes the people that we ought to fear; or sometimes a body of influential
oligarchs in the Senate, if the method of governing the State is such that
most of the business is done by that body; and sometimes individuals equipped
with power by the people and against the people. It is burdensome to keep the
friendship of all such persons; it is enough not to make enemies of them. So
the wise man will never provoke the anger of those in power; nay, he will even
turn his course, precisely as he would turn from a storm if he were steering a
ship. 8. When you travelled to Sicily, you crossed the Straits. The reckless
pilot scorned the blustering South Wind, – the wind which roughens the
Sicilian Sea and forces it into choppy currents; he sought not the shore on
the left,[2] but the strand hard by the place where Charybdis throws the seas
into confusion. Your more careful pilot, however, questions those who know the
locality as to the tides and the meaning of the clouds; he holds his course
far from that region notorious for its swirling waters. Our wise man does the
same; he shuns a strong man who may be injurious to him, making a point of not
seeming to avoid him, because an important part of one's safety lies in not
seeking safety openly; for what one avoids, one condemns.
9. We should therefore look about us, and see how we may protect ourselves
from the mob. And first of all, we should have no cravings like theirs; for
rivalry results in strife. Again, let us possess nothing that can be snatched
from us to the great profit of a plotting foe. Let there be as little booty as
possible on your person. No one sets out to shed the blood of his fellow-men
for the sake of bloodshed, – at any rate very few. More murderers speculate
on their profits than give vent to hatred. If you are empty-handed, the
highwayman passes you by; even along an infested road, the poor may travel in
peace.[3] 10. Next, we must follow the old adage and avoid three things with
special care: hatred, jealousy, and scorn. And wisdom alone can show you how
this may be done. It is hard to observe a mean; we must be chary of letting
the fear of jealousy lead us into becoming objects of scorn, lest, when we
choose not to stamp others down, we let them think that they can stamp us
down. The power to inspire fear has caused many men to be in fear.[4] Let us
withdraw ourselves in every way; for it is as harmful to be scorned as to be
admired.
11. One must therefore take refuge in philosophy; this pursuit, not only in
the eyes of good men, but also in the eyes of those who are even moderately
bad, is a sort of protecting emblem.[5] For speechmaking at the bar, or any
other pursuit that claims the people's attention, wins enemies for a man; but
philosophy is peaceful and minds her own business. Men cannot scorn her; she
is honoured by every profession, even the vilest among them. Evil can never
grow so strong, and nobility of character can never be so plotted against,
that the name of philosophy shall cease to be worshipful and sacred.
Philosophy itself, however, should be practised with calmness and
moderation. 12. "Very well, then," you retort, "do you regard the philosophy
of Marcus Cato as moderate? Cato's voice strove to check a civil war. Cato
parted the swords of maddened chieftains. When some fell foul of Pompey and
others fell foul of Caesar, Cato defied both parties at
once!" 13. Nevertheless, one may well question whether, in those days, a wise
man ought to have taken any part in public affairs, and ask: "What do you
mean, Marcus Cato? It is not now a question of freedom; long since has freedom
gone to rack and ruin. The question is, whether it is Caesar or Pompey who
controls the State. Why, Cato, should you take sides in that dispute? It is no
business of yours; a tyrant is being selected. What does it concern you who
conquers? The better man may win; but the winner is bound to be the worse
man."[6] I have referred to Cato's final rôle. But even in previous years the
wise man was not permitted to intervene in such plundering of the state; for
what could Cato do but raise his voice and utter unavailing words? At one time
he was "hustled" by the mob and spat upon and forcibly removed from the forum
and marked for exile; at another, he was taken straight to prison from the
senate-chamber.
14. However, we shall consider later[7] whether the wise man ought to give his
attention to politics; meanwhile, I beg you to consider those Stoics who, shut
out from public life, have withdrawn into privacy for the purpose of improving
men's existence and framing laws for the human race without incurring the
displeasure of those in power. The wise man will not upset the customs of the
people, nor will he invite the attention of the populace by any novel ways of
living.
15. "What then? Can one who follows out this plan be safe in any case?" I
cannot guarantee you this any more than I can guarantee good health in the
case of a man who observes moderation; although, as a matter of fact, good
health results from such moderation. Sometimes a vessel perishes in harbour;
but what do you think happens on the open sea? And how much more beset with
danger that man would be, who even in his leisure is not secure, if he were
busily working at many things! Innocent persons sometimes perish; who would
deny that? But the guilty perish more frequently. A soldier's skill is not at
fault if he receives the death-blow through his armour. 16. And finally, the
wise man regards the reason for all his actions, but not the results. The
beginning is in our own power; fortune decides the issue, but I do not allow
her to pass sentence upon myself. You may say: "But she can inflict a measure
of suffering and of trouble." The highwayman does not pass sentence when he
slays.
17. Now you are stretching forth your hand for the daily gift. Golden indeed
will be the gift with which I shall load you; and, inasmuch as we have
mentioned gold, let me tell you how its use and enjoyment may bring you
greater pleasure. "He who needs riches least, enjoys riches most."[8] "Author's
name, please!" you say. Now, to show you how generous I am, it is my intent to
praise the dicta of other schools. The phrase belongs to Epicurus, or
Metrodorus, or some one of that particular thinking-shop. 18. But what
difference does it make who spoke the words? They were uttered for the world.
He who craves riches feels fear on their account. No man, however, enjoys a
blessing that brings anxiety; he is always trying to add a little more. While
he puzzles over increasing his wealth, he forgets how to use it. He collects
his accounts, he wears out the pavement in the forum, he turns over his
ledger,[9] – in short, he ceases to be master and becomes a steward. Farewell.

I have beheld Aufidius Bassus, that noble man, shattered in health and
wrestling with his years. But they already bear upon him so heavily that he
cannot be raised up; old age has settled down upon him with great, – yes,
with its entire, weight. You know that his body was always delicate and
sapless. For a long time he has kept it in hand, or, to speak more correctly,
has kept it together; of a sudden it has collapsed. 2. Just as in a ship that
springs a leak, you can always stop the first or the second fissure, but when
many holes begin to open and let in water, the gaping hull cannot be saved;
similarly, in an old man's body, there is a certain limit up to which you can
sustain and prop its weakness. But when it comes to resemble a decrepit
building, – when every joint begins to spread and while one is being repaired
another falls apart, – then it is time for a man to look about him and
consider how he may get out.[1]
3. But the mind of our friend Bassus is active. Philosophy bestows this boon
upon us; it makes us joyful in the very sight of death, strong and brave no
matter in what state the body may be, cheerful and never failing though the
body fail us. A great pilot can sail even when his canvas is rent; if his ship
be dismantled, he can yet put in trim what remains of her hull and hold her to
her course. This is what our friend Bassus is doing; and he contemplates his
own end with the courage and countenance which you would regard as undue
indifference in a man who so contemplated another's.
4. This is a great accomplishment, Lucilius, and one which needs long practice
to learn, – to depart calmly when the inevitable hour arrives. Other kinds of
death contain an ingredient of hope: a disease comes to an end; a fire is
quenched; falling houses have set down in safety those whom they seemed
certain to crush; the sea has cast ashore unharmed those whom it had engulfed,
by the same force through which it drew them down; the soldier has drawn back
his sword from the very neck of his doomed foe. But those whom old age is
leading away to death have nothing to hope for; old age alone grants no
reprieve. No ending, to be sure, is more painless; but there is none more
lingering.
5. Our friend Bassus seemed to me to be attending his own funeral, and laying
out his own body for burial, and living almost as if he had survived his own
death, and bearing with wise resignation his grief at his own departure. For
he talks freely about death, trying hard to persuade us that if this process
contains any element of discomfort or of fear, it is the fault of the dying
person, and not of death itself; also, that there is no more inconvenience at
the actual moment than there is after it is over. 6. "And it is just as
insane," he adds, "for a man to fear what will not happen to him, as to fear
what he will not feel if it does happen." Or does anyone imagine it to be
possible that the agency by which feeling is removed can be itself felt?
"Therefore," says Bassus, "death stands so far beyond all evil that it is
beyond all fear of evils."
7. I know that all this has often been said and should be often repeated; but
neither when I read them were such precepts so effective with me, nor when I
heard them from the lips of those who were at a safe distance from the fear of
the things which they declared were not to be feared. But this old man had the
greatest weight with me when he discussed death and death was near. 8. For I
must tell you what I myself think: I hold that one is braver at the very
moment of death than when one is approaching death. For death, when it stands
near us, gives even to inexperienced men the courage not to seek to avoid the
inevitable. So the gladiator, who throughout the fight has been no matter how
faint-hearted, offers his throat to his opponent and directs the wavering
blade to the vital spot.[2] But an end that is near at hand, and is bound to
come, calls for tenacious courage of soul; this is a rarer thing, and none but
the wise man can manifest it.
9. Accordingly, I listened to Bassus with the deepest pleasure; he was casting
his vote concerning death and pointing out what sort of a thing it is when it
is observed, so to speak, nearer at hand. I suppose that a man would have your
confidence in a larger degree, and would have more weight with you, if he had
come back to life and should declare from experience that there is no evil in
death; and so, regarding the approach of death, those will tell you best what
disquiet it brings who have stood in its path, who have seen it coming and
have welcomed it. 10. Bassus may be included among these men; and he had no
wish to deceive us. He says that it is as foolish to fear death as to fear old
age; for death follows old age precisely as old age follows youth. He who does
not wish to die cannot have wished to live. For life is granted to us with the
reservation that we shall die; to this end our path leads. Therefore, how
foolish it is to fear it, since men simply await that which is sure, but fear
only that which is uncertain! 11. Death has its fixed rule, – equitable and
unavoidable. Who can complain when he is governed by terms which include
everyone? The chief part of equity, however, is equality.
But it is superfluous at the present time to plead Nature's cause; for she
wishes our laws to be identical with her own; she but resolves that which she
has compounded, and compounds again that which she has resolved. 12. Moreover,
if it falls to the lot of any man to be set gently adrift by old age, – not
suddenly torn from life, but withdrawn bit by bit, – oh, verily he should
thank the gods, one and all, because, after he has had his fill, he is removed
to a rest which is ordained for mankind, a rest that is welcome to the weary.
You may observe certain men who crave death even more earnestly than others
are wont to beg for life. And I do not know which men give us greater courage,
– those who call for death, or those who meet it cheerfully and tranquilly,
– for the first attitude is sometimes inspired by madness and sudden anger,
the second is the calm which results from fixed judgment. Before now men have
gone to meet death in a fit of rage; but when death comes to meet him, no one
welcomes it cheerfully, except the man who has long since composed himself for
death.
13. I admit, therefore, that I have visited this dear friend of mine more
frequently on many pretexts, but with the purpose of learning whether I should
find him always the same, and whether his mental strength was perhaps waning
in company with his bodily powers. But it was on the increase, just as the joy
of the charioteer is wont to show itself more clearly when he is on the
seventh round[3] of the course, and nears the prize. 14. Indeed, he often said,
in accord with the counsels of Epicurus:[4] "I hope, first of all, that there
is no pain at the moment when a man breathes his last; but if there is, one
will find an element of comfort in its very shortness. For no great pain lasts
long. And at all events, a man will find relief at the very time when soul and
body are being torn asunder, even though the process be accompanied by
excruciating pain, in the thought that after this pain is over he can feel no
more pain. I am sure, however, that an old man's soul is on his very lips, and
that only a little force is necessary to disengage it from the body. A fire
which has seized upon a substance that sustains it needs water to quench it,
or, sometimes, the destruction of the building itself; but the fire which
lacks sustaining fuel dies away of its own accord."
15. I am glad to hear such words, my dear Lucilius, – not as new to me, but
as leading me into the presence of an actual fact. And what then? Have I not
seen many men break the thread of life? I have indeed seen such men; but those
have more weight with me who approach death without any loathing for life,
letting death in, so to speak, and not pulling it towards them. 16. Bassus
kept saying: "It is due to our own fault that we feel this torture, because we
shrink from dying only when we believe that our end is near at hand." But who
is not near death? It is ready for us in all places and at all times. "Let us
consider," he went on to say, "when some agency of death seems imminent, how
much nearer are other varieties of dying which are not feared by us." 17. A
man is threatened with death by an enemy, but this form of death is
anticipated by an attack of indigestion. And if we are willing to examine
critically the various causes of our fear, we shall find that some exist, and
others only seem to be. We do not fear death; we fear the thought of death.
For death itself is always the same distance from us; wherefore, if it is to
be feared at all, it is to be feared always. For what season of our life is
exempt from death?
18. But what I really ought to fear is that you will hate this long letter
worse than death itself; so I shall stop. Do you, however, always think on
death in order that you may never fear it. Farewell.
Seneca, Ep. 37
1. You have promised to be a good man; you have enlisted under oath; that is
the strongest chain which will hold you to a sound understanding. Any man will
be but mocking you, if he declares that this is an effeminate and easy kind of
soldiering. I will not have you deceived. The words of this most honourable
compact are the same as the words of that most disgraceful one, to
wit:[1] "Through burning, imprisonment, or death by the sword." 2. From the men
who hire out their strength for the arena, who eat and drink what they must
pay for with their blood, security is taken that they will endure such trials
even though they be unwilling; from you, that you will endure them willingly
and with alacrity. The gladiator may lower his weapon and test the pity of the
people;[2] but you will neither lower your weapon nor beg for life. You must
die erect and unyielding. Moreover, what profit is it to gain a few days or a
few years? There is no discharge for us from the moment we are born.
3. "Then how can I free myself?" you ask. You cannot escape necessities, but
you can overcome them.
By force a way is made.[3]
And this way will be afforded you by philosophy. Betake yourself therefore to
philosophy if you would be safe, untroubled, happy, in fine, if you wish to
be, – and that is most important, – free. There is no other way to attain
this end. 4. Folly[4] is low, abject, mean, slavish, and exposed to many of the
cruellest passions. These passions, which are heavy taskmasters, sometimes
ruling by turns, and sometimes together, can be banished from you by wisdom,
which is the only real freedom. There is but one path leading thither, and it
is a straight path; you will not go astray. Proceed with steady step, and if
you would have all things under your control, put yourself under the control
of reason; if reason becomes your ruler, you will become ruler over many. You
will learn from her what you should undertake, and how it should be done; you
will not blunder into things. 5. You can show me no man who knows how he began
to crave that which he craves. He has not been led to that pass by
forethought; he has been driven to it by impulse. Fortune attacks us as often
as we attack Fortune. It is disgraceful, instead of proceeding ahead, to be
carried along, and then suddenly, amid the whirlpool of events, to ask in a
dazed way: "How did I get into this condition?" Farewell.

1. I enclose a copy of the letter which I wrote to Marullus[1] at the time when
he had lost his little son and was reported to be rather womanish in his grief
– a letter in which I have not observed the usual form of condolence: for I
did not believe that he should be handled gently, since in my opinion he
deserved criticism rather than consolation. When a man is stricken and is
finding it most difficult to endure a grievous wound, one must humour him for
a while; let him satisfy his grief or at any rate work off the first
shock; 2. but those who have assumed an indulgence in grief should be rebuked
forthwith, and should learn that there are certain follies even in tears.
[2]"Is it solace that you look for? Let me give you a scolding instead! You are
like a woman in the way you take your son's death; what would you do if you
had lost an intimate friend? A son, a little child of unknown promise, is
dead; a fragment of time has been lost. 3. We hunt out excuses for grief; we
would even utter unfair complaints about Fortune, as if Fortune would never
give us just reason for complaining! But I had really thought that you
possessed spirit enough to deal with concrete troubles, to say nothing of the
shadowy troubles over which men make moan through force of habit. Had you lost
a friend (which is the greatest blow of all),[3] you would have had to
endeavour rather to rejoice because you had possessed him than to mourn
because you had lost him.
4. "But many men fail to count up how manifold their gains have been, how
great their rejoicings. Grief like yours has this among other evils: it is not
only useless, but thankless. Has it then all been for nothing that you have
had such a friend? During so many years, amid such close associations, after
such intimate communion of personal interests, has nothing been accomplished?
Do you bury friendship along with a friend? And why lament having lost him, if
it be of no avail to have possessed him? Believe me, a great part of those we
have loved, though chance has removed their persons, still abides with us. The
past is ours, and there is nothing more secure for us than that which has
been. 5. We are ungrateful for past gains, because we hope for the future, as
if the future – if so be that any future is ours – will not be quickly
blended with the past. People set a narrow limit to their enjoyments if they
take pleasure only in the present; both the future and the past serve for our
delight – the one with anticipation, and the other with memories but the one
is contingent and may not come to pass, while the other must have been.
"What madness it is, therefore, to lose our grip on that which is the surest
thing of all? Let us rest content with the pleasures we have quaffed in past
days, if only, while we quaffed them, the soul was not pierced like a sieve,
only to lose again whatever it had received. 6. There are countless cases of
men who have without tears buried sons in the prime of manhood – men who have
returned from the funeral pyre to the Senate chamber, or to any other official
duties, and have straightway busied themselves with something else. And
rightly; for in the first place it is idle to grieve if you get no help from
grief. In the second place, it is unfair to complain about what has happened
to one man but is in store for all. Again, it is foolish to lament one's loss,
when there is such a slight interval between the lost and the loser. Hence we
should be more resigned in spirit, because we follow closely those whom we
have lost.
7. "Note the rapidity of Time – that swiftest of things; consider the
shortness of the course along which we hasten at top speed; mark this throng
of humanity, all straining toward the same point with briefest intervals
between them – even when they seem longest; he whom you count as passed away
has simply posted on ahead.[4] And what is more irrational than to bewail your
predecessor, when you yourself must travel on the same journey? 8. Does a man
bewail an event which he knew would take place? Or, if he did not think of
death as man's lot, he has but cheated himself. Does a man bewail an event
which he has been admitting to be unavoidable? Whoever complains about the
death of anyone, is complaining that he was a man. Everyone is bound by the
same terms: he who is privileged to be born, is destined to die. 9. Periods
of time separate us, but death levels us. The period which lies between our
first day and our last is shifting and uncertain: if you reckon it by its
troubles, it is long even to a lad, if by its speed, it is scanty even to a
greybeard. Everything is slippery, treacherous, and more shifting than any
weather. All things are tossed about and shift into their opposites at the
bidding of Fortune; amid such a turmoil of mortal affairs nothing but death is
surely in store for anyone. And yet all men complain about the one thing
wherein none of them is deceived. 10. 'But he died in boyhood.' I am not yet
prepared to say that he who quickly comes to the end of his life has the
better of the bargain; let us turn to consider the case of him who has grown
to old age. How very little is he superior to the child![5] Place before your
mind's eye the vast spread of time's abyss, and consider the universe; and
then contrast our so-called human life with infinity: you will then see how
scant is that for which we pray, and which we seek to lengthen. 11. How much
of this time is taken up with weeping, how much with worry! How much with
prayers for death before death arrives, how much with our health, how much
with our fears! How much is occupied by our years of inexperience or of
useless endeavour! And half of all this time is wasted in sleeping. Add,
besides, our toils, our griefs, our dangers – and you will comprehend that
even in the longest life real living is the least portion
thereof. 12. Nevertheless, who will make such an admission as: 'A man
is
not better off who is allowed to return home quickly, whose journey is
accomplished before he is wearied out'? Life is neither a Good nor an Evil; it
is simply the place where good and evil exist. Hence this little boy has lost
nothing except a hazard where loss was more assured than gain. He might have
turned out temperate and prudent; he might, with your fostering care, have
been moulded to a better standard; but (and this fear is more reasonable) he
might have become just like the many. 13. Note the youths of the noblest
lineage whose extravagance has flung them into the arena;[6] note those men who
cater to the passions of themselves and others in mutual lust, whose days
never pass without drunkenness or some signal act of shame; it will thus be
clear to you that there was more to fear than to hope for.
"For this reason you ought not to invite excuses for grief or aggravate slight
burdens by getting indignant. 14. I am not exhorting you to make an effort and
rise to great heights; for my opinion of you is not so low as to make me think
that it is necessary for you to summon every bit of your virtue to face this
trouble. Yours is not pain; it is a mere sting – and it is you yourself who
are turning it into pain.
"Of a surety philosophy has done you much service if you can bear courageously
the loss of a boy who was as yet better known to his nurse than to his
father! 15. And what, then? Now, at this time, am I advising you to be hard-
hearted, desiring you to keep your countenance unmoved at the very funeral
ceremony, and not allowing your soul even to feel the pinch of pain? By no
means. That would mean lack of feeling rather than virtue – to behold the
burial ceremonies of those near and dear to you with the same expression as
you beheld their living forms, and to show no emotion over the first
bereavement in your family. But suppose that I forbade you to show emotion;
there are certain feelings which claim their own rights. Tears fall, no matter
how we try to check them, and by being shed they ease the soul. 16. What,
then, shall we do? Let us allow them to fall, but let us not command them do
so; let us weep according as emotion floods our eyes, but not as much as mere
imitation shall demand. Let us, indeed, add nothing to natural grief, nor
augment it by following the example of others. The display of grief makes more
demands than grief itself: how few men are sad in their own company! They
lament the louder for being heard; persons who are reserved and silent when
alone are stirred to new paroxysms of tears when they behold others near them!
At such times they lay violent hands upon their own persons, – though they
might have done this more easily if no one were present to check them; at such
times they pray for death; at such times they toss themselves from their
couches. But their grief slackens with the departure of onlookers. 17. In this
matter, as in others also, we are obsessed by this fault – conforming to the
pattern of the many, and regarding convention rather than duty. We abandon
nature and surrender to the mob – who are never good advisers in anything,
and in this respect as in all others are most inconsistent. People see a man
who bears his grief bravely: they call him undutiful and savage-hearted; they
see a man who collapses and clings to his dead: they call him womanish and
weak. 18. Everything, therefore, should be referred to reason. But nothing is
more foolish than to court a reputation for sadness and to sanction tears; for
I hold that with a wise man some tears fall by consent, others by their own
force.
"I shall explain the difference as follows: When the first news of some bitter
loss has shocked us, when we embrace the form that will soon pass from our
arms to the funeral flames – then tears are wrung from us by the necessity of
Nature, and the life-force, smitten by the stroke of grief, shakes both the
whole body, and the eyes also, from which it presses out and causes to flow
the moisture that lies within. 19. Tears like these fall by a forcing-out
process, against our will; but different are the tears which we allow to
escape when we muse in memory upon those whom we have lost. And there is in
them a certain sweet sadness when we remember the sound of a pleasant voice, a
genial conversation, and the busy duties of yore; at such a time the eyes are
loosened, as it were, with joy. This sort of weeping we indulge; the former
sort overcomes us.
20. "There is, then, no reason why, just because a group of persons is
standing in your presence or sitting at your side, you should either check or
pour forth your tears; whether restrained or outpoured, they are never so
disgraceful as when feigned. Let them flow naturally. But it is possible for
tears to flow from the eyes of those who are quiet and at peace. They often
flow without impairing the influence of the wise man – with such restraint
that they show no want either of feeling or of self-respect. 21. We may, I
assure you, obey Nature and yet maintain our dignity. I have seen men worthy
of reverence, during the burial of those near and dear, with countenances upon
which love was written clear even after the whole apparatus of mourning was
removed, and who showed no other conduct than that which was allowed to
genuine emotion. There is a comeliness even in grief. This should be
cultivated by the wise man; even in tears, just as in other matters also,
there is a certain sufficiency; it is with the unwise that sorrows, like joys,
gush over.
22. "Accept in an unruffled spirit that which is inevitable. What can happen
that is beyond belief? Or what that is new? How many men at this very moment
are making arrangements for funerals! How many are purchasing grave-
clothes![7] How many are mourning, when you yourself have finished mourning! As
often as you reflect that your boy has ceased to be, reflect also upon man,
who has no sure promise of anything, whom Fortune does not inevitably escort
to the confines of old age, but lets him go at whatever point she sees
fit. 23. You may, however, speak often concerning the departed, and cherish
his memory to the extent of your power. This memory will return to you all the
more often if you welcome its coming without bitterness; for no man enjoys
converse with one who is sorrowful, much less with sorrow itself. And whatever
words, whatever jests of his, no matter how much of a child he was, may have
given you pleasure to hear – these I would have you recall again and again;
assure yourself confidently that he might have fulfilled the hopes which you,
his father, had entertained. 24. Indeed, to forget the beloved dead, to bury
their memory along with their bodies, to bewail them bounteously and
afterwards think of them but scantily – this is the mark of a soul below that
of man. For that is the way in which birds and beasts love their young; their
affection is quickly roused and almost reaches madness, but it cools away
entirely when its object dies. This quality does not befit a man of sense; he
should continue to remember, but should cease to mourn. 25. And in no wise do
I approve of the remark of Metrodorus – that there is a certain pleasure akin
to sadness, and that one should give chase thereto at such times as these. I
am quoting the actual words of Metrodorus[8] 26. I have no doubt what your
feelings will be in these matters; for what is baser than to 'chase after'
pleasure in the very midst of mourning – nay rather by means of mourning –
and even amid one's tears to hunt out that which will give pleasure?
These[9] are the men who accuse us[10] of too great strictness, slandering our
precepts because of supposed harshness – because (say they) we declare that
grief should either not be given place in the soul at all, or else should be
driven out forthwith. But which is the more incredible or inhuman – to feel
no grief at the loss of one's friend, or to go a-hawking after pleasure in the
midst of grief? 27. That which we Stoics advise, is honourable; when emotion
has prompted a moderate flow of tears, and has, so to speak, ceased to
effervesce, the soul should not be surrendered to grief. But what do you mean,
Metrodorus, by saying that with our very grief there should be a blending of
pleasure? That is the sweetmeat method of pacifying children; that is the way
we still the cries of infants, by pouring milk down their throats!
"Even at the moment when your son's body is on the pyre, or your friend
breathing his last, will you not suffer your pleasure to cease, rather than
tickle your very grief with pleasure? Which is the more honourable – to
remove grief from your soul, or to admit pleasure even into the company of
grief? Did I say 'admit'? Nay, I mean 'chase after,' and from the hands, too,
of grief itself. 28. Metrodorus says: 'There is a certain pleasure which is
related to sadness.' We Stoics may say that, but you may not. The only Good
which you[11] recognize, is pleasure, and the only Evil, pain; and what
relationship can there be between a Good and an Evil? But suppose that such a
relationship does exist; now, of all times, is it to be rooted out?[12] Shall
we examine grief also, and see with what elements of delight and pleasure it
is surrounded? 29. Certain remedies, which are beneficial for some parts of
the body, cannot be applied to other parts because these are, in a way,
revolting and unfit; and that which in certain cases would work to a good
purpose without any loss to one's self-respect, may become unseemly because of
the situation of the wound. Are you not, similarly, ashamed to cure sorrow by
pleasure? No, this sore spot must be treated in a more drastic way. This is
what you should preferably advise: that no sensation of evil can reach one who
is dead; for if it can reach him, he is not dead. 30. And I say that nothing
can hurt him who is as naught; for if a man can be hurt, he is alive. Do you
think him to be badly off because he is no more, or because he still exists as
somebody? And yet no torment can come to him from the fact that he is no more
– for what feeling can belong to one who does not exist? – nor from the fact
that he exists; for he has escaped the greatest disadvantage that death has in
it – namely, non-existence.
31. "Let us say this also to him who mourns and misses the untimely dead: that
all of us, whether young or old, live, in comparison with eternity, on the
same level as regards our shortness of life. For out of all time there comes
to us less than what any one could call least, since 'least' is at any rate
some part; but this life of ours is next to nothing, and yet (fools that we
are!), we marshal it in broad array!
32. "These words I have written to you, not with the idea that you should
expect a cure from me at such a late date – for it is clear to me that you
have told yourself everything that you will read in my letter – but with the
idea that I should rebuke you even for the slight delay during which you
lapsed from your true self, and should encourage you for the future, to rouse
your spirit against Fortune and to be on the watch for all her missiles, not
as if they might possibly come, but as if they were bound to come." Farewell.